CHAPTER 58
SOCKETS: FUNDAMENTALS OF TCP/IP NETWORKS

OVERVIEW

    This chapter provides an introduction to computer networking concepts and
    the TCP/IP networking protocols. An understanding of these topics is
    necessary to make effective use of Internet domain sockets, which are
    described in the next chapter.

    Starting in this chapter, we begin mentioning various Request for
    Comments (RFC) documents. Each of the networking protocols discussed in
    this book is formally described in an RFC. We provide further information
    about RFCs, as well a list of RFCs of particular relevance to the material
    covered in this this book, in Section 58.7.

SUMMARY

    TCP/IP is a layered networking protocol suite. At the bottom layer of the
    TCP/IP protocol stack is the IP network-layer protocol. IP transmits data
    in the form of datagrams. IP is connectionless, meaning that datagrams
    transmitted between source and destination hosts may take different routes
    across the network. IP is unreliable, in that it provides no guarantee
    that datagrams will arrive in order or unduplicated, or even arrive at
    all. If reliability is required, then it must be provided via the use of a
    reliable higher-layer protocol (e.g., TCP), or within an application.

    The original version of IP is IPv4. In the early 1990s, a new version of
    IP, IPv6 was devised. The most notable difference between IPv4 and IPv6 is
    that IPv4 uses 32 bits to represent a host address, while IPv6 uses 128
    bits, thus allowing for a much large number of hosts on the world-wide
    Internet. Currently, IPv4 remains the most widely used version of IP,
    although in coming years, it is likely to be supplanted by IPv6.

    Various transport-layer protocols are layered on top of IP, of which the
    most widely used are UDP and TCP. UDP is an unreliable datagram protocol.
    TCP is a reliable, connection-oriented, byte-stream protocol. TCP handles
    all of the details of connection establishment and termination. TCP also
    packages data into segments for transmission by IP, and provides sequence
    numbering for these segments so that they can be acknowledged and
    assembled in the correct order by the receiver. In addition, TCP provides
    flow control, to prevent a fast sender from overwhelming a slow receiver,
    and congestion control, to prevent a fast sender overwhelming the network.
