CHAPTER 10
TIME

OVERVIEW

    Within a program, we may be interested in two kinds of time:

        - Real time: This is the time as measured either from some standard
          point (calendar time) or from some fixed point (typically the start)
          in the life of a process (elapsed or wall clock time). Obtaining the
          calendar time is useful to programs thats, for example, timestamp
          database records or files. Measuring elapsed time is useful for a
          program that takes periodic actions or makes regular measurements
          from some external input device.

        - Process time: This is the amount of CPU time used by a process.
          Measuring process time is useful for checking or optimizing the
          performance of a program or algorithm.

    Most computer architectures have a built-in hardware clock that enables
    the kernel to measure real and process time. In this chapter, we look at
    system calls for dealing with both sorts of time, and library functions
    for converting between human-readable and internal representations of
    time. Since human-readable representations of time are dependent on the
    geographical location and on linguistic and cultural conventions,
    discussion of these representations leads us into an investigation of
    timezones and locales.


SUMMARY

    Real time corresponds to the everyday definition of time. When real time
    is measured from some standard point, we refer to it as calendar time, by
    contrast with elapsed time, which is measured from some point (usually the
    start) in the life of a process.

    Process time is the amount of CPU time used by a process, and is divided
    into user and system components.

    Various system calls enable us to get and set the system clock value
    (i.e., calendar time, as measured in seconds since the Epoch), and a range
    of library functions allow conversions between calendar time and other
    time formats, including broken-down time and human-readable character
    strings. Describing such conversions took us into a discussion of locales
    and internationalization.

    Using and displaying times and dates is an important part of many
    applications, and we'll make frequent use of the functions described in
    this chapter in later parts of this book. We also say a little more about
    the measurement of time in Chapter 23.
