CHAPTER 08
USERS AND GROUPS

SUMMARY

    Every user has a unique login name and an associated numeric user
    identifier (UID). Users can belong to one or more groups. Each group also
    has a unique name and group identifier (GID).

    The primary purpose of user and group IDs is to determine ownership of
    various system resources and to control the permissions granted to
    processes accessing those resources. For example, each file belongs to a
    particular user and group, and each process has a number of user and group
    IDs that determine who owns the process and what permissions it has when
    accessing a file (see Chapter 9 for details).

    In this chapter, we look at the system files that are used to define the
    users and groups on the system, and then describe the library functions
    used to retrieve information form these files. We conclude with a
    discussion of the crypt() function, which is used to encrypt and
    authenticate login passwords.

SUMMARY

    Each user has a unique login name and an associated numeric user ID.
    Users can belong to one or more groups, each of which also has a unique
    name and an associated numeric identifier. The primary purpose of these
    identifiers is to establish ownership of various system resources (e.g.,
    files) and permissions for accessing them.

    A user's name and ID are defined in the /etc/passwd file, which also
    contains other information about the user. A user's group memberships are
    defined by fields in the /etc/passwd and /etc/group files. A further file,
    /etc/shadow, which can be read only by privileged processes, is used to
    separate the sensitive password information from the publicly available
    user information in /etc/passwd. Various library functions are provided
    for retrieving information from each of these files.

    The crypt() function encrypts a password in the same manner as the
    standard login program, which is useful for programs that need to
    authenticate users.
