CHAPTER 51
INTRODUCTION TO POSIX IPC

OVERVIEW

    The POSIX.1b realtime extensions defined a set of IPC mechanisms that are
    analogous to the System V IPC mechanisms described in Chapters 45 to 48
    (One of the POSIX.1b developers' aims was to devise a set of IPC
    mechanisms that did not suffer the deficiencies of the System V IPC
    facilities). These IPC mechanisms are collectively referred to as POSIX
    IPC. The three POSIX IPC mechanisms are following:

        Message queues can be used to pass messages between processes. As with
        System V message queues, message boundaries are preserved, so that
        readers and writers communicate in units of messages (as opposed to
        the undelimited byte stream provided by a pipe). POSIX message queues
        permit each message to be assigned a priority, which allows
        high-priority messages to be queued ahead of low-priority messages.
        This provides some of the same functionality that is available via the
        type field of System V messages.

        Semaphore permit multiple process to synchronize their actions. As
        with System V semaphores, a POSXI semaphore is a kernel-maintained
        integer whose value is never permitted to go below 0. POSIX semaphores
        are simpler to use than System V semaphores: they are allocated
        individually (as opposed to System V semaphore sets), and they are
        operated on individually using two operations that increase and 
        decrease a semaphore's value by one (as opposed to the ability of
        the semop() system call to atomically add or subtract arbitrary
        values from multiple semaphores in a System V semaphores set).

        Shared memory enables multiple processes to shared the same region of
        memory. As with System V shared memory, POSIX shared memory provides
        fast IPC. Once one process had updated the shared memory, the changes
        is immediately visible to other processes sharing the same region.

    This chapter provides an overview of the POSIX IPC facilities, focusing on
    their common features.

SUMMARY

    POSIX IPC is the general name given to three IPC mechanisms - message
    queues, semaphores, and shared memory - that were devised by POSIX.1b as
    alternatives to the analogous System V IPC mechanism.

    The POSIX IPC interface is more consistent with the traditional UNIX file
    model. IPC object are identified by names, and managed using open, close,
    and unlink calls that operate in a manner similar to the analogous
    file-related system calls.

    POSIX IPC provides an interface that is superior in many respects to the
    System V IPC interface. However, POSIX IPC is somewhat less portable than
    System V IPC.
