CHAPTER 38
WRITING SECURE PRIVILEGED PROGRAMS

OVERVIEW

    Privileged programs have access to features and resources (files, devices,
    and so on) that are not available to ordinary users. A program can run with
    privileges by two general means:

        - The program was started under a privileged user ID. Many daemons and
          network servers, which are typically run as root, fall into this
          category.

        - The program has its set-user-ID or set-group-ID permission bit set.
          When a set-user-ID (set-group-ID) program is execed, it change the
          effective user (group) ID of the process to be the same as the owner
          (group) of the program file (We first described set-user-ID) and
          set-group-ID programs in Section 9.3). In this chapter, we'll
          sometimes use the term set-user-ID-root to distinguish a set-user-ID
          program that gives superuser privileges to a process from one that
          gives a process another effective identity.

    If a privileged program contains bugs, or can be subverted by a malicious
    user, then the security of the system or an application can be
    compromised. From a security viewpoint, we should write programs so as to
    minimize both the chance of a compromise and the damage that can be done
    if a compromise does occur. These topics form the subject of this chapter,
    which provides a set of recommended practices for secure programming, and
    describes various pitfalls that should be avoided when writing privileged
    programs.

SUMMARY

    Privileged programs have access to system resources that are not available
    to ordinary users. If such programs can be subverted, then the security of
    the system can be compromised. In this chapter, we presented a set of
    guidelines for writing privileged programs. The aim of these guidelines is
    twofold: to minimize the chances of a privileged program being subverted,
    and to minimize the damage that can be done in the event that a privileged
    program is subverted.
